Now we've talked about variances and variance elements and baseline values,
which are all important, but they're all leading up to earned value,
and this is a technique for measuring project performance
and progress in an objective manner.
So let me ask you a question.
Think for a moment.
If you have used 50% of the budget, are you halfway done with your project?
Well you likely just don't know unless you're also
tracking what has been completed.
Okay, so you've spent half of the money.
Are you functionally complete with half of the work?
That's another deeper variance that's real critical.
You might be on track at a macro level schedule-wise and feel pretty
comfortable that you're halfway through the project budget,
but what if you've only produced 10% of the work itself?
You'd really be behind.
Let's see a real simple example,
and this is one of the core elements I'd like you to use
when you manage and track your projects.
In this example we are looking at the variance of budget versus actuals and at
the same time looking at earned value or just simply what functionality did I
get done for the amount of budget that I spent.
Okay, here's our familiar WBS structure that we've seen before in this class.
The first column is the WBS #, and we have the Item Description.
That's the task we're going to do.
We have the Estimated Hours.
So again, hours is a variance element,
and the baseline are these hours because this is what I
think I will need to get the job done, 8,
40, 32, so that's our baseline.
Now I've introduced a new column here, Weighted Plan Value.
In other words, for each task, how much if I complete that task,
how much will I functionally be done from an overall project standpoint?
So for task 100 I think it's work 2% if I finish that task,
12% for the next task, 10, 18, 36, etc.
They all must add up to 100.
That means I'm completely done with this project.
So that's how much they're worth.
It may not relate at all to the number of hours.
It's going to relate to the amount of functionality
I can deliver to the customer.
Now the next column is how complete am I of this task, percent complete?
Task 100 I'm 100% complete, task 101 I'm 75%,
the next 50%, and I've made no progress on the rest,
so that's where I am at this point in time.
The next column is Planned Value Complete, PV Complete.
That's just multiplying the weighted planned value,
say 2%, times percent complete for 100%,
so you multiply these out.
And you can see at the bottom of the column I'm 16% done with
the project from a functional standpoint,
all right.
The next column is Actual Hours.
And again, hours is a variance element, and that's the actual hours used.
So for task 100 I've used 12 hours,
the next task 36 hours for a total of 48 hours used.
All right, so up at the top then, from a budget standpoint, I've consumed 14.
5% of the budget or 48 divided by 330.
Three hundred and thirty is my baseline total estimated hours,
and my actual hours so far are 48.
Pretty simple to compute.
But if that was the only variance I was looking at I wouldn't
be able to really tell well how far along am I really
materially with this project or how much functionality have I
actually completed and delivered,
so the next piece I want to look at is the percent functionally complete,
which is 16%.
And I computed that by taking the weighted plan values and
multiplying them by how much complete am I to equal the PV
completion value of 16%.
So if I'm 16% done functionally and only used 14.
5% of the budget, I would say that's pretty good, I think I'm right on track.
If it was flipped the other way,
it might mean that I might be a little bit behind.
Also, in terms of the % Cmplt column,
I get that by speaking with the software engineers
and to say hey for task number one, install and configure Visual Studio,
TFS, and SQL Server, how are you doing on that?
Oh, I've actually used 12 hours instead of the 8,
but I'm 100% done, it's all complete.
Great!
So I put the 100% there.
So you do this with looking at your time tracking systems and talking to
your software engineers to find out how complete they are,
filling in this simple spreadsheet,
and you could really look at earned value at all times and be able to tell
your customer and your stakeholders just right where you are.
Now let's look at a different example where we can look at this over time.
In this example, we're going to look at budget versus actuals over time.
Okay, there's our estimate by month, and those are our baseline values,
100 for January, 200 for February, etc.
Those are my baseline values of hours that I think
I'm going to consume on my project.
The next row are actuals.
I actually am accumulating those hours to see how many hours I have spent.
In January 80, and in February 170, etc.
So as an example in February I'm under budget.
The blue line is above the orange line.
So that's great!
I'm tracking very good.
But notice in March I'm a little bit over budget; the orange line is above.
So it's very easy to visually see where you are,
but I'm still trending pretty good.
And lastly, when I finish the project I'm actually under budget.
So in June I finished, and I'm under budget.
Now you could even take this a step further and overlay earned value,
what functionality that has been completed,
and you have a pretty good picture about your project on one simple slide,
so that's what I would suggest maybe for a way to
look at your project over time,
budget versus actuals and earned value at the same time. Okay, now let's check out some tips on project control.